BARNARD COLLEGE
DAVIS PROJECT FOR PEACE
PROPOSAL- SUMMER 2018
PROJECT CORDINATOR- CYNTHIA JUMA
HIV&AIDS EDUCATION FOR PEACE 

OBJECTIVE
My aim is to provide HIV&AIDS education to young girls in rural western Kenya with a goal of reducing the rate of HIV transmission, thereby lessening the social conflicts caused by social segregation, discrimination, family conflicts  and stigmatisation due to HIV infection.

BACKGROUND
According to AVERT, an estimated 36.7 million of the global population is currently living with HIV&AIDS with a vast majority of them -about 25.5 million- coming from low-income and middle-income countries in sub-saharan Africa. As of 2016, 1.6 million of this population was from Kenya, coupled with an estimated 36,000 HIV-related deaths. Kenya has the fourth-largest HIV&AIDS epidemic in the world with the virus affecting all sections of the general population- children, young people and adult men and women in the country.

Although there is high prevalence of HIV&AIDS infection, very little is done to sensitise the people on HIV&AIDS infection, prevention, transmission, especially among teenage girls. Many teenage girls and young women living with HIV&AIDS face serious discrimination and stigmatisation in the society because of their status. This is attributed to the fact that a majority of the uninfected people either lack information about the infection, prevention and transmission of HIV&AIDS or are gravely misinformed about the disease. In most communities, girls living with HIV&AIDS are segregated from the rest of the society, ridiculed among social groups, discriminated against and stigmatised hence they fail to fully exist as important members of their communities. As a result, some they end up suffering from psychological trauma, depression, low self-esteem and an inability to talk about HIV because of the stigma that surrounds living with HIV.

For most rural communities, being a woman is often a disadvantage and thereofre 
Focus on pregnant teenage girls 
-reinstate their education situation
-work with community health workers to educate them on modern ways of preventing mother-to-child transmission
-try to build relationships between them and local government or companies or organisations to provide employment opportunities for them.


Education is needed to correct a lot of the misconceptions people have about HIV&AIDS. A lot of people are “afraid” of people living with HIV&AIDS. The media does not help because it is very careless in portraying the lives of people living with HIV and propagating the idea that equates being HIV positive to death. Most uninfected, and infected people, do not have sufficient education about their responsibility to prevent the spread of HIV and they end up getting infected too or infecting others. It is usually very hard for people living with HIV to talk about their status, especially in rural areas. They remain sensitive about disclosure- even to family members- because of fear of stigmatisation and seclusion from their own communities. These people end up facing health problems and sometimes even death because they do not seek urgent medical care due of fear of segregation if their statuses become known to the public. Although people in bigger cities are able to seek medical care anonymously, it is especially harder for people in rural areas because confidentiality is not a guarantee and their lives become problematic very quickly. Some of the orphaned children and teenagers infected with HIV are taken out of schools by their relatives because of their presumed “immediate demise” due to their HIV diagnosis and thus people do not see the need to invest in the future of those kids. Such children end up uneducated and consequently poor because they do not qualify for regular white collar jobs. Others opt to go into crime and sex working as a source of livelihood thereby exposing others to the risk of getting infected too or encountering someone with a different strain of HIV from theirs which can also be problematic.

The government of Kenya allocates insufficient funds to issues of sensitisation and less to specifically HIV&AIDS sensitisation. Most of the support people with HIV get comes from foreign aid organisations which have been pulled out due to recent political instability in the country particularly in the Luo communities which were strongly affected by skirmishes. It is necessary and important that sensitisation is conducted to educate people on HIV&AIDS and make them live a more aware and knowledgable life. This will help them create changes in their behaviour such as stopping the use of drugs, practising safer sex, seeking medical care, attending prenatal clinic sessions and being open with heir partners and families to enable them live healthier and inclusive lives. HIV&AIDS education will curtail transmission because people will be aware of subtle ways through which HIV is transmitted, it will create a more inclusive society and open up more support for people living with HIV because unaffected people will have better knowledge about HIV&AIDS and will be more open about having these conversations, it will enhance equity because previously restricted resources and amenities will be made available to people living with HIV, it will improve the rates of infection and HIV related deaths because the discourse will be more about prevention and not segregation and it will bring a general peaceful and tranquil ambience in these societies because everyone will be treated equally regardless of their status. 

My proposal entails visiting the western and coastal regions to conduct sensitisation on HIV&AIDS. I will work with Academic Model Providing Access To Healthcare (AMPATH) which is  the leading HIV health service providers in the country to achieve my goals. Although the organisation does  I will reach out to my contact there in the spring semester as I have previously worked with them and inform them about my project. I will inform people on how cultural practises such as polygamy, wife inheritance and siring practices put them at risk of infection. Through AMPATH, I will contact local health centres in these areas to arrange workshops with the help of local health counsellors. I will use workshops to highlight the general information about HIV and bring to attention the longterm psychological impacts that stigmatisation of people living with HIV&AIDS can bring to anyone, especially children. I will give a forum for people living with HIV to discuss the grievances they face in the community and how they wish they could be treated instead. We will then begin a discussion to desensitise people on HIV&AIDS and educate them on antiretroviral therapy. I will reach out to different schools in the spring semester and work to arrange salons with students where we will talk about HIV infection, prevention and transmission. I will contact Moi Teaching & Referral Hospital’s maternal unit which works closely with AMPATH to reach out to pregnant and lactating mothers living with HIV and educate them on modern methods of preventing mother-to-child transmissions. I will visit high schools and work with peer counsellors to hold forums discussing issues about HIV&AIDS. I plan to leverage some existing models of sensitisation from AMPATH that are community specific such as home-based visits and receive mentorship from local health centres as well as come up with new ways that will enable me reach out in a manner that is culturally acceptable in each community. I will also work with local groups such as youth choirs, sports teams and local leaders to mobilise groups of people and supply pubic posters with information on HIV&AIDS. 

To ensure that sustainability, I will work with other qualified personnel at AMPATH to train health counsellors and community health workers at each local health centre on how to conduct sensitisation on HIV&AIDS. I will work with local business organisations that have a relationship with AMPATH’s to see the possibility of creating job opportunities for segregated people living with HIV to be able to earn a living. I am confident about carrying out the project successfully because I have experience working with people living with HIV at AMPATH and I am able to have people be open and confide in me because of my experience  as a peer counsellor addressing sexual education to students in my high school. I also speak the local dialect, Luo, as well as Swahili which are spoken in the Luo community and in the Coastal region respectively. This will enable me connect people from both communities and share information efficiently.



Green houses 

For most women the main source of income is selling which has become very dominated by men in recent times and women are 
For men, as sons, they are at least guaranteed a piece of land from their father , but for women it becomes specifically had to find settlement especially when you are unable to build a home of your own with a partner or secure a well-paying job for that matter 


Cater 


Rent rice farms for these girls- sustainable and used in a rotation sequence 


This is an available method of sustainability because it is something that these women have been doing for years, only that they have done it for other people, having 

This is also another way to reconcile the 

As a post-conflict area, it is almost impossible for women who had nothing to rebuild their lives. Rice farms are a dependable way for these women to do so 

they will also be producing goods that can be bought to locally existing markets 


potentially buy a rice milling machine for them and lease with local leaders 



MEET DEAN LEONG 
Inform her more about my project ideas.
 - My main project idea is to reinstate these girls as part of the community and help them rebuild their lives in a meaningful way.
Prevent/ reduce the risk of HIV&AIDS transmission between them, future partners and their children by proving HIV&AIDS education.
Break down the barrier between them as segregated members of their communities and other people and foster reconciliation as they transition back to their previously normal lives. 
Promote an economic opportunity for these women to advance themselves through a rice rotation project. 



Feedback:

how to identify these women. How to access these group of women, where they feel safe to open up to me
What would they be able to do when it’s not “planting season”
Can I rent out farms at any time of the year? What it the rental period? Who would be in place to help these women continue their work after I am gone? 
Budget for the 10k. Will I cover, subsidise the rental cost? 
How does is envelope peace
Where do they live while doing the farming especially for people who come from far away?
Is there a place for women who don’t have to go home? Thinking about a housing component for those who are otrasized?


What else they can do while the rice is growing? What’s my role with them? How can HIV&AIDS education come into play, workshops during the day

What qualifies me to be the educator 


If not, Me as the facilitator 

dsjcscnakhcnx asjzch 

Nutrition, reproductive, and sexual health 




served as a mentor for equity leadership program so I expireinec 



Dean Runsdorf

Two thoughts about that.  First, you need to be more specific about the details of the plan, your qualifications for carrying it out, and how you will spend your grant money (e.g. present a preliminary budget).  Second, the presence of the organization you will be affiliated with suggests that at least some efforts in this area are already under way.  That is, unless I misunderstand, you wouldn't be operating in a vacuum; hence, it would be helpful to know exactly how your program will fill needs that are currently unmet by organizations that already exist.


Extend to widows who are forced to sleep with men after their husbands die in a practice called “widow cleansing”. Cleaned and inherited 