In the Homeric Hymn to Demeter , Demeter is hurting from loneliness and is angry at Zeus for marrying off their daughter Persephone without consent by kidnapping her and handing her to his brother Hades. Demeter decides to leave the gods at Olympus and goes seek solace among the mortals. She meets the four daughters of Keleos at the maidens’ well and when they ask who she is, Demeter forges a human identity for herself by telling them a story different from what really happened to her.  She says she is called Doso, a slave who escaped from pirates’ bondage in  Crete. Now, why would a goddess abandon her position in the divine world to go live among mortals? Why would she fail to acknowledge her divinity before mortals and forge a human identity for herself even though the status could have instantly dignified her amongst the humans?  Why would she want to relate to humans that she decides to go live among them? It is a question of motherhood, marriage and how patriarchy menaces the lives of gods and mortals alike.

In the Homeric Hymn to Demeter, Demeter acknowledges that the daughters of  Keleos may be of women from any social strata by saying ‘Dear children, whoever of womankind you are’ (ll. 119). She shows that she is treating them equally. Her story about being captured by pirates against her own will is more like the situation Persephone was in. Persephone was married off to Hades father  Zeus against her own will and without the knowledge of her mother Demeter and she is immediately taken to live in the underworld as Hades’ wife. As Demeter talks about the ‘Doso’ character that she has invented she is actually referring to her own daughter.  There is truth in the lie. She fabricates a story that is not so different from what is happening to her and to Persephone. Dose the slave is symbolic of Persephone and Doso’s abduction by the pirates is similar to how Persephone was kidnapped into marriage. Similarly, Doso’s escape from the pirates foreshadows Persephone’s escape from the underworld. She says ‘My heart did not crave a heartwarming dinner but racing across the dark mainland I escaped my arrogant masters’ (ll.129-130). This refers to how Persephone was tricked into eating the pomegranate to bind her to the underworld where she would have to spend a third of the year. Demeter’s story intertwines with Persephone’s journey in the underworld and her despair. 

 Demeter shows how patriarchal the society can be. She say ‘By force and necessity the pirate men led me off against my desire’ (ll 124-125). She is referring to how the decision to marry off Persephone was patriarchal. Her cluelessness about Persephone’s marriage to Hades and the fact that she was not informed by Zeus or Hades even after it happened  shows that women had little or no say in issues that affected them directly or indirectly. Demeter, a goddess and wife of the king Zeus, was barely aware of her own daughter’s marriage. Hades and Zeus make a conscious decision to marry off Persephone without considering her thoughts or feelings. The divine world patriarchy is somewhat similar to the patriarchy in the mortal world. Women are the focus of submission in a household where they are expected to get married and bear children. It is even low-key odd that the eldest daughter of Keleos, who is of age to be married, is still a maiden living in his father’s house.Demeter tells her story about how the pirates would have meals in the stern of the ship and women would be left in the land. This shows how there was division between the men and women. Men were placed in higher ranks than women and had more power in the household and more control in decision making. This is also seen among the mortals. When the daughters of Keleos want agree to ask their parents if they would host Demeter, they refer to their father’s house and not their mother’s yet the woman is dutifully responsible for it.

Demeter comes off as a person who exalts marriage and respects the position of women in the institution of marriage. She tells the daughters of Keleos ‘But may all the gods who dwell in Olympus give you husbands to marry and children to bear such as parents wish for’  (ll. 135-137). She considers children a central position as fruits or evidence of marriage. To an extent Demeter, objectifies women’s position in a union as simply that of giving birth, raising children  and taking care of the house. She does not refer to any other matrimonial responsibilities that a woman conducts in a marriage except for giving birth and sustaining the household. When she met the daughters of Keleos she said ‘whoever of womankind you are’ (ll. 119) thus automatically referring to them as the mother’s and not the father’s. Nonetheless, she acknowledges that women, (and children) play an important role in the fruition of marriage because naturally, she says, that is what ‘parents wish for’ (ll. 137).

Demeter is sad and remains affected by her separation from daughter Persephone. The maternal bond is broken and she is in despair. She goes to extreme length to regain her daughter’s company. In her story, Demeter begs the daughters of Keleos to pity her (ll. 137) and at the same time she is disguised as an old woman. She is lonely and seeks solace. She is desperate because she has lost her daughter. She, a goddess, is not ashamed to mix with humans as long as she finds comfort for her loss.  She is willing to do anything to find a human host where she can be peace ‘I could nurse a well newborn child…or watch over a house’ (ll. 141-142). This shows that mothers have a special bond with their children. As much as Demeter admits that Persephone’s marriage is what a normal parent wishes for their child she is still deeply hurt by the separation. Later in the story even Metaneira is furious when Demeter tries to throw Demophoön into  the fire. Demeter also talks about motherhood with reference to her own mother. She says ‘Doso’s my name, which my honored mother gave me’ (ll. 122). Although her mother is not talked about, Demeter acknowledges her and honors her. This shows that mothers are role models to their children and serve as their immediate examples  Demeter’s suffering over Persephone’s kidnapping also justifies that a mother’s bond with her child is  inherent.
 
Demeter addresses the daughters of Keleos as maidens and children because they are all unmarried and living in their father’s house.  She says ‘Dear children…now pity me maidens’ (ll. 119) ( ll. 137). This position obviously changes once they get married. The turn from being children and maidens and become mothers and wives. Their tasks also change. As maidens in their parents’ house they fetch water from the maiden well but as married women they would be expected to bear children for their husbands and take care of the household as Demeter states. They are also supposed to be constant figures in their matrimonial homes as Persephone would is later expected to spend a third of the year in the underworld with Hades, her husband. Men are, however, not stressed upon, Keleos himself barely matters in this story and Zeus is also mildly close to the centre of it! Which implies that while men are the head of the household, mothers/women in turn do all the work of raising children and taking care of the house.  She suggests that she would be willing to work as a nurse, maid or even go about “teaching women their work” in Eleusis (ll. 140-144). With the loss of her daughter, Demeter is trying to recess to a less functional position as a wife and a mother. Her life and responsibilities as a woman revolved around her daughter Persephone but now that Persephone is gone, Demeter does not have much to do. She wants to assume the position and tasks of an ‘Elderly woman’ (ll. 139). 



 As much as Demeter supports and approves of the idea of marriage, she is also resistant to the outcome that marriage presents. She whole-heartedly tells the daughters of Keleos that she hopes that the gods in Olympus bless them with husbands to marry and children to bear (ll. 136) and goes ahead to admit that marriage is what any parent wishes for their children (ll. 137), yet, all this while, she is grieving over the loss of her daughter Persephone. Persephone’s marriage to Hades was detrimental to Demeter. Emotionally she was grieving and socially she became detached. Demeter celebrates marriage yet, she resists the outcome of marriage. She offers to go teach women ‘their work’ (ll. 144) which could be to enable them succeed in marriage while at the same time she is not over the idea that she is separated from Persephone. This bitter sweet reaction that Demeter has to marriage makes her unaccepting of full detachment from Persephone.


Demeter’s story to the daughters of Keleos is not only reflection of her journey but also that of her daughter Persephone. Demeter’s story has a place and strong correlation with the rest of the hymn. It not only reflects upon her and her despair, but also her daughter and the humans too. Through her story, Demeter is able to bring out the grievances faced by women in a normal society. She illustrates how even her divinity could not exempt her and her daughter from experiencing patriarchy. The story reflects on her daughter as young woman in the prime of her youth was forced into a marriage she did not want. By telling this story and being angered by it, Demeter shows that she shuns the patriarchy in society. She also shows her appreciation for marriage and how the fruits of the union(children) are not only a joy to the parents but also the grandparents ‘To  marry and children to bear such as every parent wishes for’(ll. 136-137). Demeter’s departure to live with the mortals is a  segue that not only helps her identify with human but also conveys a lot about how she feels at the time. Through the story Demeter conveys her thoughts on Persephone and everything that is going on around her.



