Cynthia Juma
BC HIST 4788 Gender, Sexuality and Power from Colonial to Contemporary Africa


SAME SEX MARRIAGE IN SOUTH AFRICA: THE REALITY OF LESBIANS
LIVING IN LOW-INCOME TOWNSHIPS


ABSTRACT


South Africa is the only African country that recognizes same sex marriage. However, almost 13 years later the law is still not smoothly translated into the lives of homosexual South Africans. This is due to several socioeconomic factors such as cultural and societal beliefs, poverty, race, violence and discrimination. While some lesbians have a hard time coming out and enjoying their sexualities and their bodies, others have a harder time due to some of these socioeconomic factors. This research paper sought to investigate the connection between economic deprivation and lesbian sexuality in low income townships of South Africa. In the end it established that lesbians who live the townships have a hard time because they lack resources to seek better options or shield themselves from the dangers of coming out. They have to deal with violent humiliating experiences that strip them of their dignity. Sexual minoritism introduces the idea that LGBTI[1] people are less than others and not entitled to equal treatment while economic differences reinforce the depth of the challenges they have to combat. There’s further emotional damage in that what should be a happy, affirming and life-changing event becomes tainted by rejection, shame and that sense of “otherness”.
INTRODUCTION
The Civil Union Act of 2006[2] was enacted on 30th November, 2006 by the constitutional court[3] of South Africa. The court legally recognised same sex marriage as a fundamental human right under the central argument that it fulfilled the constitutional goal of equal dignity and respect for all citizens. The court had examined the socioeconomic and political conditions that the disfavoured groups faced before passing the bill into law. South Africa’s post-apartheid constitution then became the first in the world to outlaw discrimination based on sexual orientation and the fifth to legalise same-sex marriage. While the country is hailed as the only one in Africa boastful of full marriage equality under the Civil Union Act, how does this translate into everyday life for lesbians living in low-income South African townships? 
This paper seeks to analyze the significance of the socioeconomic differences that exist for lesbians living in the townships and how or if that has impacted the declaration of their sexuality post the Civil Union Act in 2006. This time frame is important because it reveals whether life post the Civil Union Act became any different for these women given that their socioeconomic status did not change much. In the first part, I will discuss the Civil Union Act that allows legal same-sex marriage and discuss some of the limitations that affect lesbian unions, in the second part I will use my sources to examine the reality of lesbians living in the townships[4], different societal attitudes towards lesbian couples in marriage plus the violence they face and in the final part I will draw a conclusion based on the discussions made in the first two sections of the paper.


The Civil Union Act and the Marriage Act were used as important primary sources for this project because the two laws form the basis under which the rights of lesbians should be upheld- or denied. The intent of each document was clearly outlined and articulate which showed that they were generated by people who were literate. However, the Civil Union Act is still couched in the terminology and conceptions of  2006 South
Africa which has a limited range of perception and comprehension of how homosexuality has evolved ever since the bill was passed 12 years ago. This paper used two audio-visual sources[5] about some of the affected lesbians. Duduzile Zozo Part 1 is about Duduzile who was murdered after being raped and Do LGBTI South Africans Truly Have Freedom discusses coming of lesbians and the challenges they face when doing so. Both videos were very useful in personalizing their histories because they were telling their own story thus accurately conveying their emotions and explaining the whole picture from their perspective. Faces and Phases by Zanele Muholi is a collection of photographs without any oral, and textual materials that portrayed women’s canon and the roles they have played in our communities.  In Faces and Phases, Zanele exposes a series of black and butch lesbians’ portraits from the townships. Through this work, she makes butch women visible, and not deeply associated to their status of victims or the violence they are subjected to. The images captured the unspoken emotions of the women and portrayed a strong sense of visual activism and black queerness. Unlike the other sources these captioned portrays fail to give a complete picture because they leave a lot unsaid. It was therefore hard to accurately determine their feelings or combat this defect especially because all the participants were recorded to have since passed on. The articles also gave perspective to other things that limit peaceful existence for these women such as political ineptitude, poor health care, social expectations and perceptions.


Most of the existing historical work highly focused on the violence, brutality and discrimination lesbians face. Very few resources are spent on studying the nature and dynamics of violence against women and even fewer are spent on the particular form of homophobic violence that non-heterosexual people such as lesbians face[6]. Sanger’s works revealed that:


“How violence is experienced is closely linked to the ways that a single person's identities, such as race, gender, gender presentation, socio-economic level and geographical location, intersect. Risk for lesbians in South Africa is clearly linked to socio-economic status and geographical location, with 44% of white lesbians in comparison to 86% of black lesbians in a study conducted by the Triangle Project claiming that they lived in fear of sexual assault[7].”


Fletcher and Sanger establish two different connections between the socioeconomic status of the lesbians living in low-income townships and the harm done to them. While Fletcher states that corrective rape impedes economic development for lesbian women[8] Sanger agrees that violence is particularly crippling for women from lower socio-economic levels who are more susceptible to gender-based crimes such as rape. The latter supports the argument that it is because of same economic differences that the women are not shielded from violence and brutality. I’m going to use their work to show how the poverty and social instability within the townships contributes to the hardships lesbians have to face from rape, to beatings and even murder.


THE LAW


The Civil Union Act sets up a legal framework that provides some protections based on sexual orientation, but there are still many gaps in legislation, enforcement, and public attitudes that result in weaker protections[9]. The extent of homophobia in South African townships, notwithstanding the country’s progressiveness with the Civil Union Act, should not be underestimated. The law sets limitations for lesbians who have not entered a formal union, lesbians who exist in unregistered domestic partnerships and those who wish to enter customary marriages instead of civil partnerships. “Civil union" means the voluntary union of two persons who are both 18 years of age or older which is solemnised and registered by way of either 3 marriage or a civil partnership[10]. The bill thus makes marriages and civil partnerships the framework beyond which other partnership possibilities cannot exist or be recognized because the law requires the couple to formally apply through the courts to register their union in a formal contractual way. Among some of the lesbians in the townships, coming out is hard because they fear backlash from their friends, families and the community. “Women also spoke of their silence in terms of the fear of exposure that comes with telling their stories,since many black LGBTs are not yet 'out' to their families and communities”[11]. For women in this situation marriage as an option of legitimacy and protection is automatically eliminated. The legislative step to enact the Civil Union Act is more of a rupture than a social progress because there is still so much more that needs to be done to ensure that even those outside of marriage can be legitimized. The government is not doing enough to protect lesbian voters. The policies are there but they are not being implemented. Most of the politicians make promises to protect them during campaign seasons but do nothing once they are in power[12]


CULTURAL BELIEFS AND ATTITUDES 


A lot about the cultural, economic and social landscape is not addressed within the the Civil Union Act of 2006. The gap between the law that protects same sex couples and how the life for lesbians particularly urban townships is unaddressed. Black lesbians living in low income townships and surrounding areas experience hate crimes and brutal oppression such as rape from gangs, rape by so-called friends, neighbors, and sometimes even family members. Some of the “corrective rapes” inflicted on our bodies are reported to the police, but many other cases go unreported. These rampant hate crimes make lesbians  invisible  there is a lot of social intolerance and ignorance surrounding homosexuality. 


i) FEMININITY AND MASCULINITY


Femininity and masculinity intersect with socioeconomic status to play an important role in sexual and gender expression. For many lesbians, coming out automatically exposes them to the harshness of patriarchal compliance because they become at risk when we challenge the norms of compulsory heterosexuality. Lesbians who come out, especially butch lesbian, are therefore violently repressed for simply asserting their sexual orientation as it is seen as an act of activism, particularly in townships where the police protection is weaker and different forms of masculinity are most violently expressed[13]. A lot about how lesbians express themselves is rooted on society’s expectations of how a woman or a man should look like. Lesbians, and butches in particular, are corrected through rapes for not matching the ideological criterions of womanhood, socially and in their sexual practices. This confines women to only one possibility of womanhood and sexuality. Consequently, lesbians in townships grow up and live in societies where being black, female and lesbian arouses such hatred, and thus they have no option but to take this position, especially because they do not have the economic resources to fit into some protected society or subculture[14]. The Civil Union Act does not fit with current social frameworks of emerging sexualities and being inclusive to such new forms of womanhood. 
These social restrictions of sexuality stem from amendments that were implemented during apartheid to limit and regulate sexual interaction between black and white people to preserve racial division:


“The authorities imposed a real control over their citizens’ sexuality especially over black bodies and sexualities. Black males were perceived as animal-like, promiscuous, and deviant. An entire system was therefore set up and aimed at containing this sexuality considered as violent. Black men and women lost the power to act in the public sphere because of the colour of their skin, but they also had no power over their private lives, and especially over their sexuality.”[15]


This system emasculated black men and at the end of the apartheid it opened up to a crisis of masculinity characterized by violence, arising from the townships where the economic poverty of the black population continued. Black masculinity evolved from a masculinity that was regulated by colonial legislators to violent masculinities that were intolerant to those who do not match patriarchal stereotypes. Femininity on the other hand was defined through dressing, domestic roles and most importantly marriage or union to a male partner. This submitted femininity was perceived as the only acceptable form of femininity. When alternative femininities are produced, the masculine violence is always in opposition:


 “There could only be one femininity. Only one way to be a woman. The defiant ones must be corrected so as not to disrupt a national community still embedded in the process of nation-building”[16].


Violent masculinities include forcing women submission and a socializing women to only bond over heterosexual marriages. It is exceedingly difficult for women in the townships to combat this toxic masculinity and it ends up defining their sexual journey since they cannot leave the townships. Muholi’s photographic depiction of butch lesbian stories, brings out how this women have been violated as well as creates visibility. She argues that heteresexual women’s hypervisibility has been used as a tool to violate lesbian women[17] because it is viewed as the norm of how a woman is supposed to look like.


This form of manhood is not imposed from the top for it takes roots in social dynamics like low-income townships which escape the legislative control[18]. “The legislation therefore fails to impose its social control over the population. Violent actions such as rape become end up being legitimized and labelled “corrective” or “curative” even though they are acts of brutality. Corrective rapes show that citizens have replaced the law as the primary instrument of social control, allowing themselves to discipline those considered as “defiant” in the system, like lesbians[19]. Delegitimization of lesbian femininity gives strength to violent masculinity. Black men get away with repression of homosexuality through active masculinity against a passive femininity. 


While the experiences of the rape and brutality can re-conceptualize lesbian women agency and help them channel their energy into activism and highlighting visibility, overcoming the violence they went through and escaping a victimization process is a very hard process and some women like those is the townships do not have the resources to do so. Having resources might enable them to escape the framework of silence and help them generate discourse about rape, violence and brutality but for women who are economically disempowered and socially disadvantaged, most of them suffer in silence and some even die without saying anything. It is crucial for the South African society to elaborate a new discourse on homosexuality, on sexuality in general as well as to launch new actions tackling sexual issues.




For many butch lesbians, their masculine identities are structured through the power they possess not to be touched intimately during sexual encounters. Consequently, revealing intimate violation to anyone is painful, and can be delegitimizing and disempowering.


ii) VIOLENCE AND DISCRIMINATION


Africans are hostile to sexual minorities. Hate crimes take many forms, ranging from verbal assault, physical and sexual violence including gang rape, harassment, intimidation, homelessness, stalking, abduction and murder. Lesbian couples might be able to enjoy the privileges of being same sex couples however, outside the small privileged first-world enclaves of major cities, violence against lesbians is a commonplace. The assumption that lesbians are “sick” and need to be “cured” has led to violence in form of “corrective” rape, sexual abuse and even murders[20] not just in the townships but other parts of South Africa. The attitude of law enforcements has been very discouraging because arrests are not made and police are intentionally obstructing efforts of LGBTI activists to bring these women’s killers to justice[21]. Clinic workers and police often share the same homophobic attitudes as the attackers in these cases. A lot of them ask lesbians heterosexist questions and in the end most victims of homophobic violence do not come forward because they are unsure of justice or safe and unintrusive medical help. The South African government has also been slow to respond to the problem of corrective rape. South Africa’s constitution does not have any statutory law requiring increased penalties for hate crimes, but hatred motivated by homophobia has been treated by courts as an aggravating factor in sentencing. A lot of activists have called for corrective rape to made a hate crime so that lesbians can seek protection for and sexually inflicted violence.


A lot of interventions are also largely dependent on political priorities with politicians gambling on the sexualities of the LGBTQI to secure political seats with a promise of improved policies [22]. For instance, interventions to improve sexual health of lesbian and bisexual women and address sexual violence were initially proposed in the HIV & AIDS and STI Strategic Plan for South Africa 2007-2011 but these concerns were deprioritized in the National Strategic Plan on HIV, STIs and TB 2012-2016[23]. 


A hate crime can be state-sponsored and many communities endorse hate crimes, as the testimonies of “curative rapes” against lesbians prove. Duduzile Zozo is an example of the many victims of violence against lesbians as she was killed after being raped in the township where she lived and her body dumped in front of her mother’s house[24]. Bianca[25] was also raped and when she went to report the case she was laughed at and her abusers still remain unpunished so she is forced to remain silent and suffer emotional trauma instead of speaking about her rape and getting help. 


At present the country has no anti-hate-crime legislation coded into South African law related to lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender/transsexual (LGBT) people. Hate against lesbians in the townships is not classified as a distinct crime and when they are raped it is regarded simply as rape cases and not rape cases that happened as a result of prejudice against lesbians. This exposes the reality that sexuality is always constructed within, and mediated through, gender identity and that any analysis of lesbophobic hate crimes must incorporate also the interplay between sexual and gendered relations of power. Even so, legal protection does not guarantee acceptance or tolerance. The reality is often a life of loneliness, fear, rape, violence and sometimes even murder[26]. The law might grant them visibility but it certainly does not protect them outside the confines of marriage and civil unions. Sexual violence is used as the solution to correct those women’s “sexual defiance”.


The reality is that black lesbians are targets of brutal oppression in the South African townships and surrounding areas. They experience rape from gangs, rape by so-called friends, neighbors, and sometimes even family members. Some of the “curative rapes” inflicted on their bodies are reported to the police, but many other cases go unreported. Women interviewed in Fletcher’s article[27] spoke of their silence in terms of the fear of exposure that comes with telling their stories,since many black LGBTs are not yet 'out' to their families and communities. But mostly, women spoke about the shame and humiliation that comes along with the systematic revictimization by the very people who are constitutionally obliged to protect their rights as women, as lesbians, as rape survivors. These rampant hate crimes make lesbians invisible yet coming out puts them at risk because they dare to challenge the norms of compulsory heterosexuality.


The Constitutional Court prohibits the state from unfairly discriminating against gays and lesbians. The legal term that describes this is "vertical discrimination", because it operates from the level of the government downwards to the citizens:
 "No person may unfairly discriminate directly or indirectly against anyone on one or more grounds in terms of subsection".[28]
But what about private individuals-people such as employers, doctors, community members or shopkeepers- who can also be a source of discrimination? This question of "horizontal discrimination", committed by ordinary people or even organisations and companies is addressed outside of the specificity to lesbians.


iii) MARRIAGE


South Africa has three pieces of legislation that govern legally recognised partnerships: the Marriage Act, the Recognition of Customary Marriages Act, and the Civil Union Act. Anyone can choose to get married under the latter, but only the heterosexual privileged can get married under the first two. According to the Marriage Act, marriage is defined as the legally recognised voluntary union for life in common of one “man” and one “woman” to the exclusion of all other while it lasts[29]. The Marriage Act was passed by the white-only Parliament of 1961 embedded in the language of religious morality[30].  The question that arises is whether the legal definition of marriage, being a relationship between one man and one woman, constitutes discrimination, and if so, whether such discrimination is unfair. This definition sets an expectation that a marriage should only be heterosexual and is therefore exclusionary of lesbian marriages and therefore any laws that are built upon the basis of marriage or the Marriage Act therefore exclude lesbians and other same sex partners. The Marriage Act purports to bestow legal rights and special status only to heterosexual married couples so lesbians couples do not get to enjoy similar  benefits. This creates the hyper-visibility of heterosexual marriages as “marriages” while same sex marriages are considered civil unions.


African societies are still very patriarchal especially low income neighborhoods such as townships. Women are taught that they should marry men; anything outside of that is viewed as wrong. It is seen as un-African for two women to marry. Some men are threatened by this and then want to ‘fix’ it and do so by raping lesbian women. There are significant increases in attacks against lesbians in recent months in the townships which makes women afraid to come out.[31] This expectation for heterosexual marriages pressures lesbian couples into performing their relationship in a restrictive and stereotypical way. Other women who wish to get married will encounter resistance from family members and friends. Some parents do not allow their children to come out let alone get married. This leads to a life of silence and fear for them. Some lesbians go ahead and marry men until later on when they feel that it is safe enough for them to come out[32].


Heterosexual marriage is seen to provide social stability while woman-to-woman marriages do not because they have less social acceptance and “normalisation”. Lesbian marriages are seen to “weaken” the institution of marriage because they are inherently “depraved” and “immoral”. They are also shunned primarily because lesbian couples do not have the physical ability to procreate and thus lack with their production of children, especially eligible heirs, and the maintenance of a conventional image of married life. Marriage therefore acts as a social entity that allows for procreation, generational succession and social continuity all which a woman-to-woman marriage are deemed to provide because of lack of male-female intercourse, even though lesbian couples can jointly adopt children and also arrange for IVF and surrogacy treatments. 
Although homosexual marriage is legal, couples who seek to pursue civil unions still face a lot of challenges. Despite being legally afforded equal rights in South Africa, lesbian couples continue to be treated like second-class citizens by our government as Home Affairs officials discriminate against same-sex couples[33]. A marriage officer cannot be compelled to solemnise civil union. The Civil Union Act thus explicitly allows marriage officers to discriminate against same sex couples by allowing them to not perform marriage or union ceremonies based on conscience, religion or personal belief:
“A Marriage Officer, other than a Marriage Officer referred to in section 5. may in writing inform the Minister that he or she objects on the ground of conscience, religion and belief to solemnising a civil union between persons of the same sex, whereupon that marriage officer shall not be compelled to solemnise such a civil union[34]”
Lesbians living in the townships often cannot do not end up in marriages of civil unions because they fear coming out and face discriminated against as a result of it, therefore the legitimization and recognition of same sex partnerships only through marriage creates a big barrier for them to enjoy the freedom that married couples do.


iv) HEALTHCARE AND HIV/AIDS


There is a notable disparity between the experiences of women accessing public versus private healthcare. 80% of South Africans use free public facilities that are often dilapidated, understaffed and under-resourced, “while the privileged minority uses top-notch private care”[35]. A majority of women living in the townships fall among the 80% who rely on public health care. Access to public facilities is a problem by itself because there are no taxis available out of the townships therefore transportation to another facility becomes expensive and time consuming. With limited access to healthcare locations, lesbians in low-income townships are forced to rely on community health centres. Public hospitals are also not equipped with crime kits, are understaffed with trained males doctors and have even fewer female doctors[36]. Women who are raped do not have access to trauma counselling. Some of the women have also stated that the government healthcare system is either homophobic, insensitive or generally unfriendly towards lesbians because of their sexuality[37]. Lesbians who are victims of rape suffer humiliation and victimisation in the hands of doctors who are supposed to make them feel safer. “Healthcare professionals are not educated on lesbian health or sexuality and are unable answer sexual health questions regarding same-sex sex. This makes the women to feel unwelcome in clinics or other healthcare settings where they feel that their needs are being neglected”[38].
In contrast, women with access to private care are more comfortable ‘coming out’ in a situation when it was “medically relevant” because they get resources on topics involving sexual health unlike those who go to public hospitals and find that sexual health information relevant to them is unavailable. Women with access to private healthcare are also better positioned to negotiate the quality of care they receive because they are able to pay for it and they can seek other facilities if they are dissatisfied with the quality of care in their current facility[39]. 
This disparity between the agency of women in private and public facilities highlights some of the issues related to the intersectionality of class and sexuality in terms of understanding lesbian women’s access to healthcare. It is important to advocate for more inclusive healthcare to make it accessible for women from low-income places. There is need to unders these women’s experiences when planning and implementing public health interventions such as improving the government healthcare system.
CONCLUSION
In summary, economic differences do put more strain on gender expression and sexuality for lesbians living in the townships. South Africa was the first country to enshrine gay rights in its constitution and, in so doing, provided its citizens with constitutional protection from discrimination on the basis of their sexual orientation. The Civil Union Act played an important role in shaping sexual history in South Africa but it did not consider the effects of the socio-economic disparities between different groups of lesbians and homosexuals in general. The legal victory was very important but might not have had any direct and immediate bearing on the lives of many lesbians in South Africa as they face social, cultural and economic hardship in ways that cannot be easily addressed through the legal reform of union laws. The improvement of the lives of ordinary lesbians will go hand in hand with changes in societal attitudes towards minority sexualities, which to a large extent, is mainly dependent on grassroots activism and bridging economic gaps. The battle for full marriage rights was a directed, elite-based legal battle which failed to build a sustainable grassroot movement. Although the legal reform that allows lesbians to marry already happened, more economic reforms and social reforms have to be done to allow for full equality. The Civil Union Act allows for same sex marriage in South Africa but lesbians in townships do not enjoy the same freedom that other lesbians living outside of the townships might enjoy. Same sex marriage law didn’t transform society, or the conditions people lived in. “So in many ways this constitution is like a rainbow ideal, but out of touch with what is happening on the ground[40].”
One limitation in this paper however is the lack of a comparative study. While it was evident that lesbians in the townships faced a lot of violence and discrimination, it was impossible to explicitly determine that lesbians in cities did not face the same treatment because of their affluence. Whilst it was easy to assume that those in cities are cushioned by resources, it would have been dismissive to imply that they do not face the same challenges as the lesbians in the townships do. It would have been interesting to do a full comparative study between the experiences of lesbians in the townships with those in cities based on the experiences of both parties. The scarcity of comparative scholarship between lesbians living in the townships and those in affluent areas and this project open up the possibility of more extensive work to support economic disparity as a factor that contributes to violence against lesbians. This research also adds additional material to support other scholarships that criticize violence against lesbians in the townships and highlights the limitations of the Civil Union Act. Eventually, the South-African miracle may be found in those networks, in the diversity of community projects, activisms, individual and punctual actions, which rely on the wish to link what is collective to what is singular and, not to build against, but with those who oppress and reject[41].


REFERENCES
Primary Sources 
Government and official publications
1. Republic of South Africa, The Presidency, Government Gazette. www.gov.za/sites/www.gov.za/files/a17-06_1.pdf.
2. The marriage act https://www.gov.za/sites/www.gov.za/files/Act%2025%20of%201961.pdf
3. The constitution of South Africa.


Images
1. Faces and Phases Muholi, Zanele. “Faces and Phases.” Transition, no. 107, 2012, pp. 113–124. JSTOR, JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/10.2979/transition.107.113.
Oral Interviews
1. YouTube Video:  “Do LGBTI South Africans Truly Have Freedom?” YouTube, 14 Apr. 2014,       www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zoe0Q-XjYGg. 
2. IrantiOrg. “Duduzile Zozo Part 1.” YouTube, YouTube, 6 July 2013, www.youtube.com/watch?v=2X8BYIsoubg&feature=youtu.be.
Newspapers and Magazines
1. It’s time to secularise marriage in South African http://www.mambaonline.com/2018/02/26/81448/
2. Debarros, Luiz.“ ‘Lesbian & Gay Marriage in South Africa’: Part 2 – Second Class Citizens.” , 23, Mambaonline, 29 Mar. 2016, www.mambaonline.com/2016/03/29/lesbian-gay-marriage-south-africa-part-2-second-class-citizens/.


Secondary Sources
Articles and essays 
1. Thinking through lesbian rape https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/4066614.pdf?refreqid=excelsior:1eeef10cef924acd27ee74f0aacd17c7
2.  Lesbians of South-African townships : from sexual violence to collective strategies http://lartenloire.weebly.com/lesbians-of-south-african-townships--from-sexual-violence-to-collective-strategies.html
3. Healthcare Access for Lesbian and Bisexual Women in Cape Town, South Africa http://www.publichealth.northwestern.edu/nphr/2015-v2i2/9-smith.html
4. Fletcher, Charles. “ ‘Corrective Rape in South Africa’: Cultural Issues and Policy.” Lgbtq Policy Journal, 2015, pp. 61–65, lgbtq.hkspublications.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/20/2016/06/LGBTQ-2014-15.pdf.
5. Felicity Daly, Neil Spicer & Samantha Willan (2016) Sexual rights but not the right to health? Lesbian and bisexual women in South Africa’s National Strategic Plans on HIV and STIs, Reproductive Health Matters, 
6. Nadia Sanger The real problems need to be fixed first: Public discourses on sexuality and gender in South Africa https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/27917341.pdf?refreqid=excelsior%3A754ff1a36b2a11d7422337cb7034663a
7. Terry Leonard Fear and violence still rule gay township life https://mg.co.za/article/2006-11-06-fear-and-violence-still-rule-gay-township-life
Audio-visual material
 
PHOTOGRAPHS
Are there any captions? A date? Location? Names of people? What kind of clothing is being worn? Is there any lettering on signs or buildingWhere was the photograph taken? Cite your evidence


________________
[1] Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex.
[2] The South African Constitution. The Civil Union Act of 2006. Hereby referred to as the Civil Union Act.
[3] The Constitutional Court is South Africa's highest court and makes the final decision whether a matter is a constitutional matter or whether an issue is connected with a decision on a constitutional matter.
[4] Townships often refer to underdeveloped segregated urban areas that are built in the periphery of towns and cities and were reserved for Africans, Indians and Coloureds during apartheid.
[5] Zozo, Duduzile, “Duduzile Zozo Part I” eNCA, 6:50, July 6, 2013, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2X8BYIsoubg&feature=youtu.be
[6] Nadia Sanger, “The real problems need to be fixed first': Public discourses on sexuality and gender in South Africa,” Empowering Women for Gender Equity, No. 83, Feminisms today (2010), pp. 114-125.
[7] Sanger,  “The real problems need to be fixed first: Public discourses on sexuality and gender in South Africa,”     116.
[8] Charles Fletcher, “Corrective Rape in South Africa: Cultural Issues and Policy Solutions,” LGBTQ Policy Journals at the  Harvard Kennedy School Volume 5, 2014-2015: 61- 65. 
[9] Fletcher, “Corrective Rape in South Africa: Cultural Issues and Policy Solutions,” 63.
[10] The Civil Union Act, art. 1, sec. 1.
[11] Zanele Muholi, “Thinking through Lesbian Rape,”  Empowering Women for Gender Equity, No. 61, Religion & Spirituality (2004), pp. 116-125.
[12] Polokwane, Limpopo, “Do LGBTI South Africans truly have freedom,” eNCA, 6:50, April 14, 2014, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zoe0Q-XjYGg.
[13] Melanie Vion, “Lesbians of South-African townships : from sexual violence to collective strategies,” Minorites.orghttp://lartenloire.weebly.com/lesbians-of-south-african-townships--from-sexual-violence-to-collective-strategies.html (accessed April 14, 2018).
[14] Zanele Muholi, “Faces and Phases,” Transition, No. 107, Blending Borders (2012), pp. 113-124
[15] Vion, “Lesbians of South-African townships : from sexual violence to collective strategies.”
[16] Muholi, “Faces and Phases.” (2012)
[17] Muholi, “Faces and Phases.” (2012)
[18] Vion, “Lesbians of South-African townships : from sexual violence to collective strategies.”
[19] Vion, “Lesbians of South-African townships : from sexual violence to collective strategies.”
[20] YouTube Video:
Polokwane, Limpopo, “Do LGBTI South Africans truly have freedom?” eNCA, 6:50, April 14, 2014, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zoe0Q-XjYGg
[21] YouTube Video:
 Duduzile, Zozo,“Duduzile Zozo Part 1.” YouTube, YouTube, 6 July 2013, www.youtube.com/watch?v=2X8BYIsoubg&feature=youtu.be.
[22] Limpopo, “Do LGBTI South Africans truly have freedom?” (2014)
[23] Felicity Daly, Neil Spicer & Samantha Willan, “Sexual rights but not the right to health? Lesbian and bisexual women in South Africa’s National Strategic Plans on HIV and STIs,” Reproductive Health Matters,” 24:47, (2016)185-194, DOI: 10.1016/j.rhm.2016.04.005 
[24] Zozo, “Duduzile Zozo Part 1” (2013)
[25] Limpopo, “Do LGBTI South Africans truly have freedom?” (2014)
[26] Terry Leonard, Fear and violence still rule gay township life, Mail and Guardian 06 Nov 2006 23:59 https://mg.co.za/article/2006-11-06-fear-and-violence-still-rule-gay-township-life (accessed April 24, 2018).
[27] Fletcher, “Corrective Rape in South Africa: Cultural Issues and Policy Solutions,” 63.
[28] South african contitution
[29] The Marriage Act, art. 28, sec. 3
[30] It’s time to secularise marriage in south Africa
[31] Muholi, “Faces and Phases.” (2012)
[32] Video about woman who came out in marriage
[33] Debarros, Luiz.“ ‘Lesbian & Gay Marriage in South Africa’: Part 2 – Second Class Citizens.” , 23, Mambaonline, 29 Mar. 2016, www.mambaonline.com/2016/03/29/lesbian-gay-marriage-south-africa-part-2-second-class-citizens/.
[34] Civil Union Act sec. 6. 
[35] Riley Smith “Healthcare Access for Lesbian and Bisexual Women in Cape Town, South Africa,”   Public Health Review Journal volume 2, issue 2 (2015). 
[36] Zanele, “Thinking through Lesbian Rape,” 120.
[37] Zanele, “Thinking through Lesbian Rape,” 121.
[38] Riley, “Healthcare Access for Lesbian and Bisexual Women in Cape Town, South Africa,”
[39] Riley, “Healthcare Access for Lesbian and Bisexual Women in Cape Town, South Africa,”
[40] Muholi, “Faces and Phases.” (2012)
[41] Vion, “Lesbians of South-African townships : from sexual violence to collective strategies.”